[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hi, it's James here
from Food Matters.
And today I'm with a dear
friend, Mike Sherbakov.
He is a former Marine.
He has studied kinesiology
and psychology.
He is the founder of the
Greatness Foundation,
and also the meme
Do Great Things.
He is a force for
good on planet Earth.
And I'm excited to
chat with him today
about how conscious business
can shape the future of humanity
and how you and I can play
a part in that future.
Hello, Mike.
>> James, thanks for
having me, brother.
>> I'm excited to chat.
And like most
interviews, I'm really
interested in the personal
story behind the person
and what it took to create you
and the work that you do today.
So was there an impetus that
sort of set you on this path
towards sort of helping
philanthropic organizations,
creating your own, doing
good work in the world,
helping people find more
purpose and meaning?
Or if there wasn't a
particular catalyst,
what was it just like
growing up in your life,
in your household?
>> Well, I grew up with
very strict parents.
I was born in Russia.
We moved to the States
when I was five years old.
And growing up in
my household, it
was all about
following the rules.
My oldest sister
went to Stanford.
My sister after that got her
doctorate in neuroscience.
And I was kind of the
black sheep in the family.
I was the one that was
always asking questions.
At the time, my parents
would have thought
and seen it as rebellious.
But now looking
back, it was really
just me questioning, why are
we doing the things we do?
Why do we think the
things that we think?
Why do we-- that's a question
that always fascinated me.
Why do we do the things
we do in general?
And so while
everyone in my family
was on a certain path,
when I turned 18,
I decided to join
the Marines, which
was totally outside the norm.
In fact, no one in my friend
group, no one in my family,
no one had any
military experience.
It was just one of
those things that I
knew was the right path for me.
And I think when-- to answer
your question, that's really
the first time in the
hero's journey, I would say,
that there was this
separation, where there
was a certain path I
was on and I realized,
I'm going to take a
different path, one
that's entirely true to me.
And now that I look back,
it all starts to make sense
and the dots connect.
But one of the things I learned
really early in the Marines
was, when I thought that I
had reached my potential,
I was only a fraction
of the way there.
Where I felt like I couldn't
do a single push up more,
and there's 85 other people in
the platoon that are relying
on me to do one more, I could
do one more, and then one more,
and one more after that.
So it got me fascinated
with this idea of potential,
and why do we limit ourselves,
and later in my life realizing,
why do we limit the businesses
that we create with this glass
ceiling of what we think
they're capable of, when they're
truly capable of a
lot more than that?
So the natural transition
for me was after the Marines,
I needed to study it.
So I went and
studied kinesiology,
how the body works, because
I was fascinated with that.
And then psychology
is how the mind works.
How do those things
integrate, and really,
why do we do the things we do?
I came back to that
question always,
questioning life in general.
You know, where do we come from?
Where do we go?
Why do we do what we do?
And so never studying
entrepreneurship or business
or anything like that, after
I graduated from university,
I started to notice a pattern.
In the Marines, I had
understood my potential
from a physical standpoint.
In college, I started
to understand potential
from a mental
standpoint of, well,
I am capable of a lot more
than I think I'm capable of.
Then I started going into
yoga teacher training
and understanding the
spiritual evolution
and how much potential
there was there.
And then I started
my first business.
And this is where
everything really clicked,
how it all came together
is I started to realize,
as individuals, we are capable
of a certain amount of impact.
We can go out and
create great impact
with our immediate family,
our friends, our community.
But that's limited.
I started to
realize how business
can be this force for good.
A huge catalyst
for me was actually
reading "Start Something That
Matters" by Blake Mycoskie,
who's the founder of Toms.
At the time, I had
a business that
was already running
and generating
a good amount of revenue.
And it didn't have a
strong mission to it.
The mission at the time
was strictly revenue-based.
So after reading "Start
Something That Matters,"
I ended up selling that
business and starting
Karuna Towels, which
was a blend, for me,
of impact and income.
It was-- I had partnered with
the Against Malaria Foundation.
And at the same time, we
were selling these yoga mats
that you would put
on top of yoga towels
that you put on
top of yoga mats.
And for every one
that we sold, we
would provide a bed net
for a family in Africa.
So we do this one-for-one model.
And that was really my first
understanding or my first dip
into social entrepreneurship
and realizing how business
can be a force for good.
So that's kind of
the short version
of about 10 years of my life.
>> Amazing.
So interesting
journey and foray.
One of the things
I want to touch on
that you mentioned in particular
was this idea of separation.
I can really
empathize with that,
because my journey began by
choosing something completely
different, as well.
It wasn't that Marines.
I was a merchant seaman.
So I worked on ships--
container ships,
tankers, passenger ferries.
I used to drive them,
was a navigator, and then
private yachts.
And that took me
away from everything.
You know, it was
completely isolated.
And it was a really
formative part of my journey.
Can you explain to me, what
was that separation like?
How did that help you sort of
identify some of these things
that you wanted to
focus on in your life?
And did that time in
that very different phase
of your life in the Marines
help you really develop
a lot of what you
decided to work on today?
I want to go deep into that.
>> Yeah.
I would say a common
question that I
get is, what made me join
the Marines at the time?
And other than knowing that
that was what I needed to do,
I really don't have
a great answer to it.
I remember walking in
the recruiter's office
for the first time and they
have this recruiting tool
where they put out all these
placards in front of you.
And they each have
a word on them--
camaraderie, adventure,
challenge, brotherhood,
patriotism, all of these
different qualities that you--
or experiences that one
might have in the Marines.
And I remember the
recruiter saying, you know,
put them in the order that
it's most important to you.
And I remember looking
at all of them--
there were probably 12 or 15--
and said all of these
things are important to me
right now in my life.
At 18 years old, it was
exactly what I was looking for.
And it just felt aligned with
what I knew I needed to do.
Again, my parents
didn't even know
I was going to the recruiters
office at the time.
It was just, this is the path.
This what you need to do.
This is what your
sisters have done.
This is what our family's
done for generations.
You just-- you know,
you go to high school.
You go to college.
You get a good job.
And you stay in that job.
And you retire.
And that was the path.
And I said, I'm not
going to take that path.
And so I finally, looking at
these placards in front of me,
I knew that that was-- that
was what I needed to do.
And as soon as I
joined, it was--
the skills I learned
from the experiences
are invaluable-- leadership,
confidence, courage.
I grew up playing sports,
and so I felt comfortable
in leadership roles.
But I generally would allow
other people to be leaders.
I would kind of silently
let them do their thing.
And in the Marines, it was
really this first opportunity
where I started to step
into the kind of leader
that I always knew
I was capable of,
but maybe a role that I didn't
consciously and intentionally
step into.
And I think through
that experience,
I did really well
in the Marines.
I got meritoriously promoted
several times, which
is very rare.
I mean, even in a
general Marines career,
maybe one meritorious
promotion in 20 years
is something that's a
really great accomplishment.
And I had several of those.
I set some records
through, you know,
the physical, mental,
fitness areas.
And I would say that my
leadership and my courage
was developed through
that whole process.
>> Yeah, that's awesome.
That's cool that you
mentioned Blake, as well,
because I think he really
helped put conscious business
on the road map for at least in
the more modern sense of, you
know, one for one ideology.
You've got some
interesting theories
on the history and the
evolution of conscious business,
around these sort of four Ps
that we've spoken about before.
I'd love it if you
could share with me sort
of what they are
and sort of if there
was any sort of
historical point in time
that-- to give people some
reference of how that unfolded.
>> Yeah.
I found the evolution of
business to be fascinating,
understanding that
business first was--
in understanding the primary
fundamentals of business,
which is this voluntary exchange
between someone offering
a product or service
and that person
receiving value from
that product or service
and exchanging money for it.
So initially, the
point of business--
what I call business 1.0--
was just profit.
It was, I'm going to give
you this product or service.
And in exchange, I'm
going to receive money.
And that's really the
only thing I care about.
From a business owner, from a
business creation standpoint,
and really what it comes
down to is the consciousness
or the intention
behind the business.
It was solely, how
can I generate income
from what I'm creating.
And that's not a bad
thing, by any means.
But that's just what the
principles of capitalism
are built upon.
And then all the
sudden, we start moving
into caring more about people.
And this isn't just people
within our organization.
But these are actually
the customers, as well.
So because with capitalism
it drives innovation--
as long as someone
doesn't have a monopoly,
it drives-- the prices
continue to kind of lower.
So it forces people to come up
with products and services that
are better, and also
caring for people
within their company
and their customers.
And so all of a sudden, we
move into this generation
of business 2.0, which
is now not only profit,
but we're starting to care
about people, as well.
And then we fast forward
into around the time
"An Inconvenient Truth"
came out and Al Gore's
talking about climate change.
And people are just
more mindful of what's
happening on a global scale.
And people start being
concerned about the planet.
They're worried about
wildlife conservation.
They're worried
about climate change.
They're starting to just be
aware of these things that are
happening on a global level.
So we move into business 3.0,
which is now including planet.
So we have what people call
triple bottom line, which
is you have your profit,
people, and planet-- or people
say people, planet, profit.
Great.
And now it's an exciting
time in our lives
because we're seeing a
shift into business 4.0.
And it's the fourth
P, which is purpose.
And we start to feel
it as individuals,
we start to feel it
collectively, as well,
that we're looking to not only
create businesses, but align
ourselves and be consumers
of businesses that
have purpose tied into them.
So this rise of
conscious capitalism,
this rise of the for-benefit
movement, this rise of not
only being concerned about the
profits-- because the profits
are the lifeblood of the
business, absolutely.
Not only taking care of your
employees and your consumers
and customers that
you're serving.
Not only being
mindful of the type
of impact we're
having on the planet,
but also being aligned
with a purpose.
And this is where I
believe coming down
to our individual purpose
is more important than ever,
because yes, can you take a
huge organization and a company
and start to slowly move it more
into an alignment with purpose?
Yes.
My sister is a wonderful
example of that.
She does consulting in
the for-benefits space.
One of her clients
right now is Versace.
So you take this huge brand
and it's taking a long time
to take a company
like that that wants
to become for-benefit
and start to steer
that ship in a slightly
different direction that's
more aligned with purpose.
The reason I'm so passionate
about entrepreneurship
is because if we start
from inception being clear
on our purpose, which
I really believe
is the intersections of our
passions, our strengths,
and our connection to
the world, with all
the social and environmental
challenges our world is facing,
which one do we feel
most connected to?
So just like a seed,
it's a lot easier
to focus on what that seed that
we're planting in the ground
is and then water it
and give it everything
that it needs to
nurture and grow.
So much easier to
do that than to try
to change this big huge tree
that's already been grown
for years, or maybe decades.
So that's why I believe
it's ultimately so important
to understand what
our purpose is,
and then create something
meaningful from that, which
is one of the things that we
do at Greatness Foundation, why
I'm so excited and passionate
about this purpose-driven
entrepreneurship.
I like to tell people,
start a business that
matters as you move into this
new model of business 4.0.
>> Amazing.
How is this relevant
for individuals that
might not be entrepreneurs?
Because I really
believe that we have--
we're inherently-- we
voted in a top down system.
We said no to feudalism.
We said no to communism.
We said no to
dictatorships, obviously.
You know, we sort of voted
in this idea of democracy.
And now we live in what we
refer to as this Western,
Industrialized, Educated, Rich,
and Democratic society, which
is a WEIRD acronym--
literally.
In that framework,
it's not everybody
that starts a
conscious business,
but people want
to effect change.
So can that happen?
How can people sort of
find out or interact
with conscious businesses?
And how can that be a landscape
for change in the world?
>> Yeah, absolutely.
As you mentioned,
I don't believe
everyone is designed
to be an entrepreneur.
The beautiful thing, though,
about asking the questions--
I am a firm believer in
the quality of our life
depends upon the quality of
the questions we ask ourselves.
And so I think that when someone
asks, what is my purpose?
What kinds of things
am I passionate about?
am I great at?
What do I feel a
connection to in the world?
Maybe it's down the path
of entrepreneurship,
but maybe just by getting
clear on what your purpose is,
you find an organization,
a company, a nonprofit,
some kind of entity that
aligns with those same values.
And there's really no better
answer than intuitively
and energetically we feel that.
We know, for instance, when
someone walks in the room
and after a few
minutes of having
a conversation with them, the
kind of energy that they carry,
we say things like, you
know, they've got good vibes.
They've got bad vibes.
Energetically, we may not be
able to explain all of it.
And yet, we feel
these things, just
like we do with
people and situations
and experiences we're in.
Sometimes we walk
down a dark alley.
We go, something
about this feels off.
Let me go this other way.
The same exact thing
happens with organizations
and who we choose to
spend our time with
and the kinds of things we
spend our time thinking about.
I think a really great
example of this is--
I have a friend,
Dr. Jeremy Goldberg.
I remember doing a podcast
interview with him.
And he said, Mike, you're going
to suffer one way or another.
And by suffering,
he meant that you're
going to go through
challenges in life.
In the hero's journey, we
would call this the initiation.
So he says you're exchanging
your time for something,
so why not suffer or exchange
your time for something that's
meaningful to you.
And so the prerequisite
to doing something
that's meaningful to
you is to realize,
what is meaningful to me?
What kinds of things
do I care about?
Do I care about
wildlife conservation?
You know, do I care about
providing this kind of product
or service to someone?
And absolutely.
It may not be you
that's creating
that thing from the ground up.
But you'll align
with other people
who are doing the same things,
this being a great example.
We start with a
conversation-- oh, wow,
we're both passionate
about conscious capitalism,
about purpose-driven
entrepreneurship,
about creating a better world.
And so whether it's
mine or yours or ours,
it doesn't matter.
The fact is, we get
to come together
and share resources that
are ultimately compounding.
1 plus 1 doesn't equal 2.
1 plus 1 equals 11
in this case, right?
>> That idea of synergy, right?
This understanding
essentially probably invited
you to start Greatness
Foundation, in a way,
and this ideology
of, do great things.
Tell me, what was the inception
of that, and some of the things
that you do, because I know
you do a lot of great work.
I mean, personally you
do philanthropic work.
But then as part of
this organization,
you lead groups to go and do
work building houses or schools
for people.
How has this understanding
helped inspire that movement?
>> Well, it is the foundation
for the foundation.
And what I mean by that is, I
was in a workshop about seven
years ago and they asked us
this very important question of,
what would you do if you had
all of the money and the time
in the world?
You wake up tomorrow morning
and you have $100 million
in your bank account and
you've got all the freedom.
After you-- if someone wants
to buy the things they want
to buy or go on the
trips they want to go on
and then things
kind of slow down,
how do you spend the
rest of your days?
And the kinds of things
that came to mind,
the kinds of things I
started writing down,
was, well, I want to travel.
I want to give back.
I want to learn
as much as I can.
I want to surround myself
with amazing people.
I want to create content.
I want to teach.
And I said, I don't want to
wait until the end of my life
to do all this.
In fact, one of the studies that
completely transformed my life
was Dr. Bronnie Ware, the
Australian palliative care
nurse who studied patients
as they were dying.
And she realized that the number
one regret that everyone had
across the board--
men, women, all ages--
was that they wish they'd
had the courage to live
a life true to themselves,
not the life others
expected of them.
I took that to heart.
I didn't want to be
at the end of my life
wishing I'd had the courage
to live a life true to myself.
So I'm in this workshop
and I realize, why don't I
start doing that now?
And right about
that same time, I
was actually invited on my first
house build project to Mexico.
And I've always been passionate
about impact and travel
and making a difference.
So I go on this
weekend experience.
We build a home
from the ground up.
The families prior
to us coming were
living on dirt-- sticks for
walls, tarps for a roof.
And as I'm driving back in
the van on Sunday, Sunday
afternoon, I'm
crying my eyes out.
And I'm having this incredibly
emotional experience.
And at the time, I don't know
why I'm having the experience.
But I do know that I need
more of that in my life.
This was about seven years ago.
So I come back to San Diego
and I just put a message out
on social media and I say, I
just had an amazing experience.
I want to go back and do this.
Does anyone want to join me?
And one person
raised their hand.
Two people raised their hand.
Three people raised their hand.
And now here we are
seven years later
where this is a huge
milestone for us.
Just the other day, on
Monday afternoon, we
put up a post opening
up a new project,
because all our projects are
full for the rest of the year--
in 36 hours raised $12,000 and
filled up the entire weekend.
I mean, and this just
speaks to the excitement
that there is behind
making a difference.
So seven years ago, the
community starts building.
And I actually approach
business a bit backwards,
because instead of offering
a product or a service
and then sharing
it with a market,
we created and built
a community first.
I had these other businesses
that were running,
so I kind of had the freedom
to be able to do that of,
build this community.
And then start to ask
them what it is they want.
And the kinds of
things that came
to the surface and
the kinds of people--
the kind of things that people
said that they wanted were they
wanted to know how
to start a business.
They wanted to start something
that matters to them.
They wanted more
community events.
And so really,
Greatness Foundation
has grown to become this-- what
we call an impact accelerator.
It's focused on life,
business, and impact.
So it has the personal
development side,
because I've seen that as
integral to any business.
Anytime I work with companies--
and I do work with lululemon,
with Qualcomm, with Fitbit, with
some of these billion dollar
brands.
And as I'm going in there
to work with their teams,
it always comes
down to individuals.
It's individuals behind and
underneath the organizations.
So if we can change
their mindset,
if we can understand
what their goals are,
what their purpose
is, it ultimately
steers the ship of the
larger organization.
So this personal development
we're deeply focused on.
We launched a
business incubator,
which now actually walks
people through step by step
how to start
businesses that matter.
And then on the impact
side, we allow them
to join us for these projects.
So we've been building homes
for the last seven years.
So we've done a lot
throughout Mexico.
We helped open a
school in Nicaragua.
We're building a
children's home in Kenya.
And we're taking all this
and we have a deep focus now
on what we call the Do Great
Things project, which is
educating high school students.
And this is a deep,
deep passion of mine,
because I realize all of these
things we've been teaching
to our community over the
years on personal development,
on business development,
how to make an impact,
mindfulness entrepreneurship--
I start to think of, what if
I learned that in high school?
These are the classes
that I wish I had.
So our amazing impact
and community director
within Greatness Foundation
came up with this idea--
I can't take credit for it--
but said, why don't we take
everything we've been teaching,
boil it down into an
easy-to-understand curriculum,
and start to teach
it to high schools--
high school students
all across the country,
and eventually around
the world, and offer
them different incentives.
Teach them about the UN
sustainable development goals
and how to create
projects and missions
that are aligned with that.
So that's a really
exciting thing for me.
And that's what we're doing
and deeply committed to
at Greatness Foundation.
>> Do great things, man.
>> Do great things.
That's really inspiring.
And I think that
where you've created
a really good intersection
between meaning and business
is wrapping it in this
philanthropic idea, you know,
and really bringing
light to the fact
that it feels good to give back.
Can I touch on the schooling
thing for a little bit?
>> Please.
>> We created a schooling
system in the Victorian era
to accelerate our capability
to put graduates from those
particular ideologies
into industrial age--
or into an industrial
age workforce.
We're using a very similar
system now, 253, 300 years on,
and we're not saying, I believe,
great success with that,
merely by looking at the markets
for happiness in our society.
We have over 100
million prescriptions
written for anti-depressants
annually in the US,
and about 22 million people
taking SSRI antidepressants
daily.
So something is wrong
with our culture,
with our culture
scape, with the way
that we're doing things as
modern, domesticated humans.
Do you think our schooling
system is part of the problem?
What do you think
the big failings
of our modern
schooling system are?
Our current schooling system
is spitting out people
to be ready for
industrial era jobs
and it's not going
to solve the problem.
What is the big challenges with
our current education model?
>> The biggest challenge with
our current education model is
that it's an archaic
and old system.
And it's not taking
into consideration
the kinds of things that people
are actually passionate about.
And I'll elaborate
on that a little bit.
The school bell rings.
The children get up out of their
seats and they go to lunch.
The school bell rings
again and they leave lunch
and they come back and
sit down in their desks.
And they follow the rules.
And they memorize what's
needed to be memorized.
And they're taught,
essentially, to be robots.
And if you look at
society as a whole,
look at how someone operates
Monday through Friday.
Wake up to an alarm clock.
They sit in their car.
They drive to a job.
And not to sound insensitive to
anyone in any job that they do,
but they're essentially trained
like a monkey or a robot
to simply push
whatever buttons or say
whatever you need to
say for x amount of time
throughout the day.
And then you go back in
your car and you go home
and you kind of do the
same thing over again.
Of course, we've evolved
past factory jobs,
because that's what
original school was designed
to do-- follow the bell, work
at the factory, go to lunch,
come back.
But we're essentially
doing the same things.
And we're becoming very robotic
in everything that we do.
You look at someone's
Monday through Friday
and it's very robotic.
And unfortunately--
and fortunately--
people are realizing that
this isn't what life's about.
Life is not about going to
work, paying bills, and dying.
And people are starting
to wake up to the fact
that there's so much more
to life than just this job
and waiting for retirement
at the end of the road.
So what does that require?
It requires an
entire overhaul of
our current educational system.
It's not about becoming a robot
and memorizing and following
the rules and listening
to a bell schedule.
It's actually about problem
solving and creative thinking.
And so why is it that
when I was growing up,
we never learned about,
what is your purpose?
What kinds of things are
you passionate about?
What do you want to pursue?
Why didn't I have
any choice in that?
Why did I have to
sit in this classroom
and follow a certain curriculum
that someone else decided
was important to me?
And this comes back to
my always questioning.
I questioned that in
high school all the time.
I followed the rules because
that's kind of what I did.
But I was always
questioning, why?
Why are we doing this?
And so what I love seeing is
that there's this new model
of education being born.
There's wonderful schools
here in San Diego.
We have one called SOUL School--
School Of Universal Learning--
where at a very early age
they're asking them,
what kinds of things
are you passionate about?
Of all the problems that
you see in the world,
how could you see yourself
solving one of those problems?
They're teaching them
about entrepreneurship
and intrepreneurship and
interpersonal communication.
And you know, beyond even
the kinds of things we do,
I think it's important
to rewind and think
about how we're being.
I really believe in this
model of be, do, give.
There's a framework
that some people
teach that's be, do, have.
And I'm not a fan of that.
In fact, I've played
the game of having.
I've climbed that mountain.
And it's the least fulfilling.
And it's the least
purposeful journey
I've ever been on is
focused on what I have.
As soon as I started to realize
that greatness in our lives
is not about what we
have but what we give,
my entire life changed.
So why don't we start to plant
that seed a little bit earlier?
Imagine teaching kids at
a very young age, what
if we started to give more?
And it becomes a
cultural thing, even
beyond just our
educational model
and the curriculum
that we teach.
But what if on our birthdays--
this is one thing I love to do.
I have a 14-year-old son.
Instead of gifts, what
if you thought about ways
you can give?
What if on holidays we weren't
excited about the things
that we were getting, but we
were excited about ways that we
can give to other people.
And so I think it comes
down to just a radical shift
collectively, culturally,
in our mindset of,
it's not about the
things that we have.
I think we're all
on the same page.
We realize it's not
about what we have.
How can we start to collectively
understand that life
is about what we give?
>> Dude, that was really good.
That was really good.
I like that.
I'm inspired deeply.
One of the things you talk to--
and it's part of this sort
of educational program,
and also part of
helping people identify
purpose, which I think is
an important discussion,
because people
need some framework
and massaging in order
to sort of develop
what their purpose might be.
And even though that
might change, that's OK.
You've got this framework
which is based on what are you
passionate about,
and I don't think
people take the time to really
think about that very often.
Or-- and I'm not sure if
you want to speak to this--
what we're passionate about
may be conditioned onto us
or into us by our parenting.
And I want to just talk to
something here and let you
jam on it if you
think it's relevant.
When we're growing up, we have
all these parts of who we are.
And Artie Wu, this
particular psychotherapist,
has a fantastic way
of referencing it.
He says, we have a board
of directors inside of us.
And it's like our
soul board, right?
And one might be
really artistic.
One might be really
childish and creative,
like me out on the surf.
One might be really determined
and business-centric
and really by the numbers.
And another one might be this.
But then as we grow
up, our parents
are loving to us in ways
that are conditional.
We're all familiar
with conditional love.
You get good grades,
I'll love you.
I'll get you this.
Whatever.
And so we start to lock up
some of these board members
that we have a relationship to.
Like, maybe it's the artist.
We've got to lock that bad
boy away for a few years,
because that's not
where I'm getting
rewarded for love in my home.
And then we hit out--
and we strengthen our
other board members
and we go and do the business
thing and we go do that.
And then we're
sort of not happy.
We're like, oh, that's right.
I love classical music.
I forgot about that.
Or I love aqua or I love
watercolor painting,
or I love language
and philosophy.
And so later on
in life, we start
to figure those out again
and sort of reestablish
our connection to them.
So what I wanted to ask you
is, when you're guiding people
or businesses-- but let's
maybe center it on people--
through a process of discovering
their purpose in a deeper
way, shape, or form,
and you say to them,
what are you passionate about?
How do you really get to the
bottom of that for people
and sort of skip over
the superficialities of,
like, I'm passionate about, you
know, consulting with companies
and helping them break through
profit barriers or whatever.
It's like, hang on,
that's your brain talking.
What are you really
passionate about?
Actually, like, I'm passionate
about helping foster kids.
How do you break through
that, and is there
a process around
helping people identify
more deeply with their
intersection of finding
this purpose.
>> Yeah.
Finding your purpose
comes down to two things.
The first one is dropping
from the head into the heart.
And the best way to do
that is through meditation
and mindfulness and actually
taking the time to be quiet
and to listen.
And the second one is
asking the right questions.
I mentioned earlier that
the quality of our life
depends upon the quality of
the questions we ask ourselves.
So if asking, what are
you passionate about,
doesn't resonate with you, there
are so many deeper questions
we can ask.
What kinds of
things do you enjoy?
What kinds of things
are you curious about?
are you interested in?
What kinds of things
did you like as a child,
do you remember really
enjoying as a child,
that you maybe haven't
even thought about,
like playing the guitar
or the piano or singing?
What kinds of things
bring you joy?
makes you come alive?
What kinds of things, when
you think about doing,
make you smile?
And so all of these
kinds of questions,
if we just start asking them--
I'm a huge fan of Marcus
Aurelius, the famous Roman
emperor and philosopher.
And he says, the
soul becomes dyed
with the color of its thoughts.
So what kinds of things
are we thinking about?
And I'm always thinking about,
what am I passionate about?
What makes me come alive?
Howard Thurman says, don't
ask what the world needs.
Ask what it is that
makes you come alive,
because what the world needs
is people who have come alive.
And so it's not about arriving
at the answer right away.
It's about asking
better questions.
And so passions are--
it can be so many
different things.
And the same thing
with your strengths.
As we find that intersection
of passions, strengths,
and our connection to
the world, strengths
can be seen the exact same
way, as what kinds of things
are you good at?
What kinds of
things would you say
are your God-given abilities?
What kinds of things
are people telling you
that you're good at that
you may not even recognize,
that people can
always be saying, wow,
you're such an amazing listener.
You're an amazing listener.
But it never really
registers until you take
the time to think about it.
And again, coming down to
this practice of meditation,
mindfulness, yoga,
whatever that is,
it's time to be alone
with our thoughts.
I think as a society, we're
constantly conditioned
to chase the next thing.
And take it from me,
this goal-oriented
achievement-driven person--
and I call myself a
recovering perfectionist,
because as soon as I hit one
goal, I'm setting the next one.
And I'm onto the next.
This is why when yoga
came into my life,
it completely
transformed my life,
because for the first time,
I was forcing myself to just
be with myself.
I used to be really
uncomfortable
even taking myself to the movies
or taking myself to dinner.
I do that all the time.
I'm an INTJ at heart.
I mean, I love my
time by myself.
So I think what it comes
down to fundamentally
is for the individual to
spend time with themselves.
And the beautiful
thing about this
is it removes any
of the conditioning.
It removes any of the
board of directors
that maybe have been shut down.
It allows everyone
to come to the party
and play the game because
when you're by yourself,
there's no one else telling you
what the answers need to be.
So I often do this exercise for
individuals and organizations.
And I ask them,
what kinds of things
are they passionate about?
And I go, well, let's
play pretend for a second.
Let's play pretend that
those things aren't just
a coincidence.
This is the beautiful
thing about life
is not only are we destined
for something great,
not only are we
here to do something
incredible with our lives, but
we're also given the blueprint
on how to do it.
That's the beautiful part.
So when you get quiet
enough and you ask yourself,
what are you passionate about?
And really ask yourself
and just sit with it.
OK.
This is it right
now in this moment.
And what kinds of
things are you good at.
And really sit with it.
And that's what this is
right now in this moment.
That's not anyone else.
That's not your parents.
That's not society.
That's not anyone else telling
you what you need to do
or what you need to
be passionate about.
So you get to take
that as an individual
and follow that
as your blueprint.
And when I say,
let's play pretend,
even if this sounds
crazy to you,
even though it
sounds so out there,
just try it on for a minute
that the things that you're
passionate about, the
things that you're good at,
and the connection you
feel to the world--
the thing that you want
to change in some way
or fix or have an impact with--
pretend like that
isn't a coincidence
and that's an actual
blueprint for you to follow.
So it gives life meaning.
It gives life purpose.
It gives us a north star that
we continue to move towards.
And that's a really
great feeling,
because it just comes
down to progress then.
We spoke about school
and education earlier.
School and education
is someone else
putting a north star for
us and saying, follow this.
This is your path.
Finding your purpose
is deciding what
your path and making
progress in that direction.
Tony Robbins says,
progress equals happiness.
But what he forgot
to say is progress
in the area that's
most meaningful to
you equals happiness.
If we make progress on
a path that's not ours,
that's not meaningful to us.
I've been there.
I've been on that path, doing
what's not meaningful to me.
So we have to
individually decide
what it is that's
meaningful to us,
and hopefully create
something-- with business
or maybe be involved with an
organization or something that
can scale that kind
of impact that's
aligned with our purpose.
>> Magical.
I love how you put it.
You make it sound simple.
>> It is simple.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
It's simple, but it's not easy.
>> I'm empathizing with you
deeply, going yes, I agree.
And I really reflect on
my journey in many ways.
You know, in 2006,
2007, you know,
I remember being on
this private yacht.
We were driving
through the Red Sea.
It was three days after an
attempted piracy boarding.
I mean, it was a pretty
crazy area of the world,
and handing out resignation
in and then getting
to Monte Carlo, ordering some
film equipment from BNH New
York and starting-- interviewing
people that we loved.
You know, and it was just
such an awesome thing to do.
We felt so driven
and just enlightened
by the whole process.
And it's guided us ever since.
So I think there's
a lot to be said
for following your passion.
Do you have any
stories of people--
short of your own, of course--
that have gone through this
transformative process,
or that you've seen
just have a new part
of them awoken through this--
through engaging
in deepening what
it means to live a
more purposeful life,
or even in the process
of giving back?
Are there people that stand out?
Any stories that stand
out that you're like--
that you like sharing?
>> The honest answer
is, right now,
everyone in my life
is that example.
And my goal-- one of
the goals I have is
is to share more
of those stories,
because I believe that's why I
do the Do Great Things podcast.
It's why I have the kinds of
conversations that I have,
because--
and share them as often as
possible-- because what it does
is it provides a possibility
to someone, someone that's
going through the
hamster wheel, someone
that's on the path that's
not meant for them.
When they see someone
else who has separated,
who has gone on their own
hero's journey, hopefully
all of the sudden it shows
them now that's possible.
And everyone has a different
story that they connect with.
Some people-- let's
say that they've
been in the military--
can connect with my story.
And they go, oh, I
was a Marine, too.
And I thought I had to stay in.
But now I have this
different path I can take.
Someone else might connect
with a musician that's
heard the story
of them following
their passion for music
and art and creating
a life and a
business around that.
And so at this point in
my life, I intentionally
surround myself with people who
are amazing examples of that.
And I'm constantly
telling them--
I'm constantly inspired and in
awe of the people in my life.
And so there's no shortage
of examples in the world.
It's just the kinds of things
that we're looking for.
You're an amazing
example of that,
what's being created
by people who
are in alignment with their
purpose and their passion.
I think more of those
stories need to be shared.
>> Amazing.
Agree.
And that's going to help invoke
more recruits to the cause
of living a purpose-driven life
and improving the quality of--
or our capability to
stay even on this planet
for a little longer.
You spoke and you keep speaking
about Joseph Campbell's
work and the hero's journey.
To me, I love this, especially
from a filmmaker's perspective,
especially as a storyteller.
My sort of role in the
world is to help give light
to stories that can improve
the quality of the fabric
of society that we have.
And you've mentioned
this multiple times.
And I'm glad you did.
Can you explain to
me in your words
this sort of idea of
the hero's journey
and how people
could connect with--
connect with that, because they
might think, oh, I'm a failure.
You know, I'm not ready yet.
But when you connect
to the hero's journey,
you're like, oh wow,
I'm just here right now.
Or I'm out here.
Or I've separated.
Or I've made this
amazing discovery.
So what is the hero's journey
and how can people relate
to that in their own lives?
>> Yeah, so the hero's journey
is this famous narrative that
really applies to all of us.
And there are three main
parts of the hero's journey.
There's a separation,
initiation, and a return.
And the beautiful thing
about the hero's journey
is it's cyclical.
It's something that
happens on macro cycles.
And it happens on micro cycles.
And it's not at one point we've
just reached it and we're done
and we've finished.
It's something that we're
always moving through.
And so here are a
couple interesting parts
of the hero's journey that I
feel that we, as individuals,
can relate to being somewhere
on the journey at any given
point in our lives.
So the first thing that
happens is we're on a path--
a path that maybe
someone else decided
was ours to take--
parents, society, school,
whatever we decide.
And we realize we're meant
to be on a different path.
And so when we first realize
we're meant to be on a path,
this is what Joseph
Campbell would
call the CTA, the Call To
Action or the Call To Adventure.
He would say that
the phone is ringing.
And what's fascinating about
this part of the hero's journey
is most people don't pick
up the phone right away.
This is where it actually
gets a little bit sad,
because some people will wait an
entire lifetime not picking up
the phone.
They'll hear the phone ringing
but they won't pick it up.
And those are the people that
are on their deathbed saying,
I wish I'd had the courage to
live a life true to myself.
What they're saying is,
I wish I had the courage
to pick up the phone.
So when we do pick
up the phone and we
answer that CTA,
that Call To Action
or Call To Adventure,
Joseph Campbell would say,
we cross the threshold and we've
officially made the separation.
And we move from the first
part into the second part,
which is now the initiation.
And this is where we're
going through the fire.
We start to meet allies.
We start to connect with other
people who share our values,
the people who stand for
the same kind of things
we stand for, the
people who believe in us
and that we believe in, the
people that are inspiring us,
the people that we want
along this journey, that we
want on this ride with us.
And at the same time, we
start to fight our dragons.
And dragons can
be family members
that don't believe in us.
They can be friends that
we've had for a long time
that we think we need to
stay friends with just
because that's been so long.
It can be our own
personal beliefs
that we've had about ourselves
for a long time, to include,
I am not enough.
Here I go again.
Who am I to be doing this?
All the self-doubt that
creeps in our minds--
those are the dragons.
So it's external
or internal dragons
that we fight going
through the fire.
And we all have to
experience that.
And as soon as we're done
going through this fire,
that's not the end.
It's not like we've
gone into the abyss.
We've discovered our gifts.
And end of story.
No, now is the return.
And this is the beautiful
part about the hero's journey,
because we've gone
separation, initiation.
Now it's time for the return.
It's actually time to take
the gifts that you found
about yourself, about
what your purpose is,
about what you're
here to do, and it's
time to bring them to the world.
It's not about going
to the top of an ashram
off into a mountain somewhere
and meditating there
for the rest of your life.
If that's your hero's
journey, then great.
But for most of us
it's about finding
what our gifts are,
finding how they're
impacting humanity's
civilization, culture,
other people.
And again, this model of be,
do, have-- be, do, give--
it's about finding what
it is we're here to give
and then bringing
that to the world.
So the return is
the exciting part,
because we actually
get to take those gifts
and now share them
with the world.
So here is this famous
narrative that we
can see applied
across the movies
that we watch, the books that
we read, and also in our lives.
And what I found by
interviewing amazing people who
are doing great things in the
world, what I found by having
these kinds of
conversations is, everyone
who is doing something
great in the world
has a hero's journey that
they've been through.
Every single one of them has had
a point where they separated.
They were on a certain path.
And they knew they needed
to take a different path.
They answered the call to
action or call to adventure.
Every single one of them
experienced challenges
throughout the way.
Every single one
of them discovered
what their gifts are and
is bringing them back
to the world in some way.
And that's the beautiful
thing is because it now
gives meaning to life.
It gives us an exciting reason
to wake up every single day,
because we're living
into the hero's journey.
We get to live this
adventure that we're on.
>> You spoke to meaning just
recently about how, you know,
Victor Frankl was even able
to find meaning amidst dire
situations.
How is meaning
and why is meaning
so important to
people in this life?
>> Well, essentially, we
are meaning-making machines.
Every moment,
event, or experience
is just an event, a
moment, or an experience.
And yet, we as human beings
are wonderful at placing
negative meanings on certain
situations then replaying those
over and over in our minds, like
stepping into a really bad film
and watching it
over and over again.
What we realize is, everything
that we've experienced in life
is exactly what we
needed to experience.
Everything we've been through
has been divinely orchestrated
in some way to bring us to
this present moment right now.
So if you are grateful
for this moment,
you must, by
definition, be grateful
for every single
moment that you've
been through that got
you to this moment,
and every single one
that unfolds beyond that.
And so the meaning is
something that we can place
on events and experiences.
So if we feel like
something negative happened
to us in our lives, we don't
have to see it as negative.
If we feel like we're going
through something challenging,
we get to actually apply
this meaning making principle
to what we're going
through right now,
because it's not good or bad.
We get to decide what it is.
And so every single challenge we
experience-- which, newsflash,
you will continue to
experience challenging things
in your life.
Every single person does.
Nothing great has ever been
accomplished without someone
going through
extreme challenges,
extreme adversity,
extreme criticism
by people who didn't
believe in them.
And yet, we get to
take all those things
and put our own meaning on it.
So my meaning for everything
I've experienced in my life
is it's been beautifully,
divinely orchestrated.
When I wake up and I feel
a bit of a dissonance--
I call it a divine discomfort--
between where I am right now
and what I know I am
capable of, the meaning I'm
placing on that is beautiful.
I'm not upset
about that feeling.
In fact, I'm grateful that
it's there, because now I
get to step fully into that.
In fact, if I didn't
have something
that I felt like I was
working towards or moving
into or becoming or doing
or giving in some capacity,
I feel like that would
lose the purpose of life.
I feel like there's
always something
that we as human
beings are striving
to do in this lifetime.
>> Amazing.
So good.
I believe in you.
I feel like I want
to go to your church.
How-- give me some
more examples of how
you're enabling this into the
modern framework of society.
So you're taking your
lessons that you've
discovered in many ways through
doing philanthropic work
and you're guiding people
through this process.
Now you're guiding
organizations.
You know, what hope do you have
for the world in this work?
Do you hope that
more people wake up
to finding their purpose?
Do you think that that's
the most important work
that we can do?
How do we solve some of the
biggest problems on the planet
right now?
I mean, these are big
questions, but how does that
tie into sort of the whole
honey of our conversation?
>> Well, I'll share
a story with you.
And it's the story of
a boy and a starfish.
And the story goes like this.
One morning, an old man
is walking on the beach.
And he looks down and sees
in the distance what looks
like a dancing silhouette.
And as he gets
closer, he realized,
it's not a dancing silhouette.
It's actually a little boy.
And what the little
boy is doing is
he's picking starfish
up from the beach
and he's throwing them into
the ocean one at a time--
picking up a starfish and
throwing it in the ocean.
And the old man, he's
lived kind of a rough life.
He kind of sees
things a certain way
and he's a little bit cynical.
And he says, boy,
what are you doing?
And the boy says, you
can't see what's happening?
He said, the sun's out
in the middle of the sky.
The tide's gone out.
There's starfish
lining the beach.
And if I don't pick them up
and throw them in the ocean,
they're going to die.
They're going to
burn up and die.
And the old man looks
and looks, and says,
boy, there's miles of beach this
way, miles of beach that way,
there's thousands if not tens
of thousands of starfish.
You can't possibly
make a difference.
And the little boy
picks up a starfish,
throws it in, and says, it
made a difference to that one.
And what I feel is I am
that little boy that's
picking up one starfish at
a time and throwing it in.
And I think this story is a
powerful illustration of, yes,
there are miles
of beach this way
and miles of beach that way.
There are countless challenges--
environmental, social,
financial, political-- so many
challenges our world is facing.
And yet, most people will
be the old man and say,
you can't possibly
make a difference.
Why even try?
And yet, there are some of us--
and there are more and more.
This community is
growing of people
who are just going to
say, you know what,
let me pick up what my starfish
is to pick up and throw in.
And just by doing
that, just by being
in that process of
picking up our starfish
and throwing it in, it's
inspiring other people.
And so here I am, seven years
later, on this Greatness
Foundation journey
and I realize,
we have this community
of tens of thousands,
if not hundreds of thousands of
people who, all of the sudden,
I've just been picking up
one starfish at a time,
throwing it in.
I look back behind me or
next to me or in front of me
and people are picking up
starfish and throwing them in
because they've
watched me do it.
And so my goal is just to
continue to pick that up,
whatever my starfish is.
And everyone has their own.
And as other people
join this collective--
figuring out what their starfish
and putting it in the ocean--
it inspires other people
to do the same thing.
And at some point,
I really believe
that we, as a collective
consciousness,
as humanity, will
tip the scales.
We're going to reach a
tipping point where there
are more people who are doing
the picking up of the starfish
and throwing it in than that
are standing there criticizing
and wondering and
saying, we can't possibly
make a difference.
So I believe if every
single person actually
connected with what
their purpose is,
what their starfish
is, and just said,
I'm going to do it, one
at a time, one at a time--
that's how it's going
to shift humanity.
That's going to solve
every single problem
or challenge, opportunity,
that our world is facing.
So it comes down, absolutely,
to an individual level.
We each have our purpose and
our greatness to step into.
>> In our society, the way that
we've incentivized the modern
world is really an ROI based
or a GDP-based ideology.
So it's this Gross
Domestic Product.
So we've created a
for-profit incentivization
system for our world.
So for example,
this is something
that helps us improve our
scoring metric as a developed
country--
more car crashes and more
accidents and more emergency
care improves our GDP.
More sick people going into
hospitals improves our GDP.
Moms going back
to work with haste
and putting their
child into childcare
increases their
economic capability.
They're spending
money on childcare.
They're in the
workforce earning money
and then spending more money.
And yet, staying at home to
care for the emotional health
of that child is not
recognized as improving GDP.
The surfer who walks out
of the water is like, woo.
And you see that person, you're
like, why is he so excited?
He's just lit up my day.
He's not adding to Gross
Domestic Product or GDP,
and so therefore
they're not economically
valuable in our society.
Your mother tending
to her horses
and being a really
heart-centered gardener
is caring for the microbes
and making an improvement.
But it's not impacting
GDP, our metric.
How do you think our
metrics have screwed up
what we do in the world?
And how would you
explain that people
doing the most basic,
simple, heart-centered things
is the most important
thing they can do?
>> Well, everything
comes down to incentives.
And unfortunately,
in the Western world,
we are incentivized
by profits and we're
incentivized by money.
And because of that, you see the
kind of systematic challenges
that our world is facing,
including higher levels
of depression and suicide
than ever before, including
overmedication,
overprescription.
I mean, you look at
all of the problems
and they really stem
from incentives,
to include the education model
and the curriculum that's
being taught.
All of this is because of the
incentives that are placed.
So Bucky Fuller has this
amazing quote about,
don't try to change
the current model.
Create a new one that
makes the old one obsolete.
And I love just thinking
about new models that can make
the old one
obsolete, including--
instead of looking at GDP,
Gross Domestic Product--
what if we looked at things like
gross purpose product or gross
happy--
GHP.
We're looking at what
makes people the happiest?
What makes people most alive?
And so I've seen some
fascinating ideas for this,
down to wearing some
kind of trackable device
that tracks the kind of
energy that you're emitting.
Let's put 0, you know, love
or hate, anger, fear, 1,000
being love, joy, and peace,
and where you feel most in flow
and alive.
And imagine if we
were incentivized
to be in that kind
of energy space more.
And of course,
these can probably
sound like really crazy
ideas and concepts,
but what if we start
moving closer to that?
What if we change the incentives
so people are in alignment
with their purpose?
This is why I'm passionate
about providing for basic needs
because I feel like when people
are in a scarcity mindset
and they're concerned
about how to pay the bills
and making sure that the
lights stay on in their home
or putting food on their
table for their kids,
when you're operating
in a scarcity mindset,
it's hard to even think about
what your creative passions
and pursuits are.
And so what if all of
those needs were met?
What if we found a way to meet
everyone's basic needs so we
can start to move up
Maslow's hierarchy of needs
into the very peak?
The very top of Maslow's
pyramid of hierarchy of needs
is self-actualization.
He says, "what one
can be, one must be."
So what is it that
we're here to become?
And so what you'll
notice in a society
where people do have
those basic needs met
is they start to follow more
of those passionate pursuits,
the things that
they're curious about,
the things they're
interested in.
People re-engage with the
arts and poetry and music.
And so I think that it comes
down to not only meeting
basic needs but creating an
entirely new incentive model
where people are now
encouraged to go pursue what
it is they're passionate about.
>> I'm really glad I
asked you that question,
because that was
an amazing answer.
What are some examples
of people doing
something that's important, that
is not necessarily recognized?
Like the mother
deciding, you know what?
I just want to be here
and really consciously
and emotionally
engage with my child
during the early
stages of its life.
Or your mother, for
instance, how she's
diving deep into
that simple practice
of just caring for her alpacas,
her one llama, her horses,
and her garden.
Like, can you give
people permission--
is it OK to give people
permission for them
to do these simple pursuits
that might seem trivial,
but are actually deep dives
into really connecting
with the importance
of being human?
>> Not only do I give people
permission to do that,
I believe it's necessary.
I believe that the
poet must make poetry.
The artist must make art.
The musician must make music.
The gardener must take
care of the garden.
What one can be, one must be.
We must become what
we're here to become.
And so the beautiful thing
is we get to figure that out
on our own what that is for us.
And yet, every
single one of those
is crucial to the bigger whole.
There's this fascinating
study that was done in
and coin that was termed--
a term that was coined
called the overview effect,
which is when astronauts go to
outer space and they come back,
their families and their friends
start to go, something changed.
Fundamentally, there's something
different about this human
being.
And as they've done these
longitudinal studies
on astronauts and figuring
out what exactly shifted,
they came up with this term
called the overview effect.
What it boils down to is this--
when you're in space
looking down on the Earth,
you see the Earth as a
living, breathing organism.
And we, as humans, as
part of this organism,
are like the cells in our body.
We are a small part of
a much bigger puzzle.
And yet, just like we
need every single cell
to come together to make tissue
and tissue to make organs
and organs to make up the
body, every single human being,
when they're alive
and on purpose,
gets to be the cell that is
functioning at its highest
capacity in order to
make this organism, which
is planet Earth.
They see it as a
living, breathing being.
We're just a part of it.
So I think it's a great
opportunity for us
to feel insignificant
and extremely significant
at the exact same time--
insignificant in the sense
that, yes, we are a small
piece of a much bigger puzzle,
and incredibly significant
because what we do matters.
Whether we take up that starfish
and put it in the ocean,
whether we step
into our purpose,
whether we do what
we're here to do,
every single one of
those cells needs
to be functioning
the best possible way
that it can be in order
for the whole to operate
the way that it needs to.
>> I knew you had more to say.
I knew you had to say that.
That was great.
That was perfect.
That's exactly what I also
wanted you to contribute to,
so thank you so much
for your contribution.
Mike, you're a force for good.
You're a force for God.
You're a force for this
creative energy on planet.
I'm so grateful for the
work that you're doing.
And thank you so much
for your time today.
>> Thank you, brother.
Grateful for you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]